Knowledge of the seventh gradation can be defined as true; that is, directly self-verifying. At this stage, knowledge penetrates into the very structure of reality, and sees the operation of the universal laws. Here the dualism of freedom and necessity is harmonized; to know means to know all, including the place of each part in relation to the whole, its actual and potential destiny, and the means whereby the cosmic purpose in any given occasion can be fulfilled. True knowledge is effectual not merely for the particular whole within which it is lodged, but for the ordering of the universal process. The possessors of true knowledge are themselves both creators and also regulators—able to transmit consciously all the three forces of the triad and to produce, upon the scale of their own existence, the balancing of structures. 

True knowledge is not absolute knowledge nor even final knowledge, for it is limited by the level of being and the form of will with which it is associated. Any given whole can reach the limits of its own possibilities of attaining true knowledge; but in so far as it has the power of transforming its own being and of liberating its own will, it can progress beyond this limit. 

It is sometimes held that consistency is a test of true knowledge. This view, however, leads to many difficulties, especially in the domains of religion and art, but also unmistakably in the realms of philosophy and science. Knowledge can be true, self-evident, and self-verifying, and yet be confined within the limits of a given whole. When it is present, the functions of that whole are completely harmonized and well-ordered. There is a complete adaptation of the inner and the outer worlds. This brings with it right action and also the power to create order and to disseminate it. Nevertheless, knowledge and power continue to be relative to that particular whole, and the corresponding knowledge in another whole may be inconsistent with it—and even contradictory. In this lies the principal distinction between knowledge and understanding; for knowledge, being an ordering of the functions only, is necessarily limited by the functions and their powers. Understanding, being a property of the will, can never be inconsistent or contradictory—either within a given whole or as between different wholes. This is expressed in Gurdjieff's aphorism: "To understand means to agree. Where there is not agreement, there is not understanding." 

We may appropriately end this section by quoting Gurdjieff's aphorism of knowledge, the meaning of which can be recognized from the preceding discussion: "To know means to know all. Not to know all means not to know. It is possible to know all, and, indeed, to know all it is needful to know very little. But in order to know this very little, it is necessary first to know pretty much."<sup>1</sup> 


<sup>1</sup> Quoted by P. D. Ouspensky in his London talks on Gurdjieff's teaching in the year 1922.