Knowledge is evidently some kind of link or bridge between sameness and difference. In a perfectly homogeneous situation there would be nothing to know; while confronted by complete heterogeneity, knowledge would be impossible. Nevertheless, the mediating role of knowledge cannot readily be expressed in a formula. Let us begin, therefore, by examining various situations in which knowledge is a factor. If we are late for an appointment, we may excuse ourselves by saying, 'I did not know the time', or else we may say, 'I did not notice how late it was'. Since these two statements have roughly the same meaning, it would seem that we know what we notice and what we fail to notice we do not know. Experience teaches us that noticing is usually the perception of differences. We 'notice' what attracts our attention by some unexpectedness— by standing out from its environment—by 'differentness'. We soon cease to notice an object that remains always the same, either in relation to ourselves or to its environment. 

The disappearance from our attention, and hence from our immediate knowledge, of that which remains the same is not only an important psychological fact but it is also an indication of the limitations of knowledge itself. What we appear to know is always the transition from same to other. It would be more accurate, however, to say that we cannot know what things are but only what they do. When we speak, we frequently appear to be referring to what things are; but if we suppose that this is so, we deceive ourselves. Nearly all our conversation is about knowledge—about what we know or suppose we know. One of our handicaps is that we tend not to notice that which we do not already know, and hence our knowledge lacks the means for recognizing and correcting its own defects. Knowledge is subjective, and cannot stand apart from itself in order to test its own limitations by reference to some objective standard. 

There is a false objectivism that loses touch with experience and decries as 'psychologism' the very necessary practice of examining meanings by inquiring whether or not we discover them in our experience. The cogito, ergo sum of Descartes cannot be discussed objectively until we have satisfied ourselves whether any single word in the two phrases has a clear and fixed meaning for us. 'I think, therefore I am' appears to be a statement of fact; but it is really an assertion of being, for it affirms that there is in man an 'I' that can be conscious of his thoughts.<sup>1</sup> 

There is an equally false subjectivism that assumes, without weighing the evidence, that the laws of the universe can be discovered in our own habits of thought. Plato recognized that there must be some correspondence between the knower and the known; but the significance of this conclusion differs entirely according to the views a philosopher may hold as to the nature of substance. If knower and known were made of different stuffs, there could be no direct relationship between the two. Knowledge would have then to be treated as some kind of hybrid substance able to participate in the nature of both subject and object.

It seems clear, therefore, that the right way to approach the study of knowledge is to examine the part it plays in human life. It plays a part because it is connected with belief. On the whole, what we believe is a factor in our behaviour—not completely decisive but always significant. We have therefore to distinguish between the kind of belief that constitutes knowledge and that which does not. We incline to connect knowledge with the truth and falsehood of beliefs, and, moreover, we usually take it for granted that beliefs can be formulated as propositions in verbal terms; that is, as sentences. If a belief thus formulated is proved in experience to be true, it is regarded as knowledge; but when proved to be false, it is branded as illusion or error.<sup>2</sup> 

Such a process of trial and error is too restrictive, partly because there can never be a sharp division of beliefs into those which are wholly true and those which are wholly false. This is, however, not the whole point; for there is a large range of beliefs that are never expressed in verbal form and, indeed, could never be wholly so expressed. Such beliefs refer mostly to 'knowing how'. A surgeon may know how to perform a delicate operation or a singer may know how to produce a certain quality of sound, but they could not communicate their knowledge in words or sentences that would convey the meaning of their experience to the layman. Even as between two experts, there is a point at which verbal communication breaks down; yet the presence of knowledge is recognized in such phrases as: "Yes, I see how you do it." 

By applying this—the operationalist—theory of knowledge, some defects in communication are avoided. Knowledge, regarded as the adaptation of behaviour to function, corresponds to what we discover in our experience, and does not involve us in any awkward questions as to the meaning, of truth. Such questions arise when knowledge is defined in terms of the triad belief—truth—knowledge, in which belief is a subjective state.<sup>3</sup> The operationalist theory of knowledge is therefore a step in the right direction; but to make it adequate we must recognize that intellectual, or verbal, knowledge is only a fraction of possible knowledge.<sup>4</sup>

We must eliminate such pseudo-knowledge as consists in automatic phrases or sentences, such as 'Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon in 40 B.C.', or 'The companion of Sirius is a White Dwarf. Such sentences, unless they can be related directly, or even indirectly, to our own life and experience are mere 'information', and do not concern our present problem. We shall use the word 'knowledge' in a sense that goes beyond mere 'information', and so implies that it is a factor in determining behaviour. On the other hand, we have to bear in mind the distinction already made between knowledge and understanding—the former being an aspect of function only and the latter an aspect of will. The use of the word 'knowledge' in this discussion will be further restricted to the functional correspondence between different elements of experience. A conviction that experience is of one and the same stuff throughout obliges us also to use the word 'knowledge' in such a way that it is applicable to all wholes. Moreover, we must use this word in such a way as to apply it equally to the situation of 'knowing what' and to that of 'knowing how'. Such is the difference between recognizing a motor-car when we see one and knowing how to drive it; but we must avoid using the word in such a way as to suggest that two quite different kinds of experience are involved. If we look closely, we find that all knowledge is really 'knowing how'; that recognizing a motor-car means knowing how to distinguish it from a bicycle or an aeroplane, or from any other whole that may present itself to our experience. 


<sup>1</sup> Cf. G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London, 1949). His discussion of the 'ghost in the machine' (p. 16) is one of the latest of a long series of critical inquiries made since the time of Gautama Buddha that have led to the conclusion that words such as 'I', 'myself, and 'soul' correspond to nothing that we find in our experience. 

<sup>2</sup> Cf. Bertrand Russell, Human Knowledge, p. 270.

<sup>3</sup> Cf. Bertrand Russell, loc. cit., p. 161: "A belief is a certain kind of state of mind or body or both—truth is a relationship of correspondence." P. 170: "Every belief is true if there is a fact having to the picture the kind of similarity that a prototype has to an image." 

<sup>4</sup> The operationalist account of knowledge goes back to Newton's 'hypotheses non fingo'. This was given a fresh significance by Mach, and was made the basis of scientific explanation by Bridgman. Cf. P. W. Bridgman, 'The Nature of Some of our Physical Concepts', Brit. Journ. for the Phil. of Sc. Vol. I, No. 4, p. 257. J. O. Wisdom in Foundations of Inference in Natural Science (London, 1952), Chap. 9, discusses operationalism and shows why it is necessary to go beyond the verbal formula.