The questions that really matter to man were asked long ago, and they still remain without an answer. There are no myths so primitive nor legends so ancient but they express man's quest for an understanding of his destiny and of his relationship to his Creator and his creation. So old are these questions that the earliest records of human speculation—such as the Epic of Gilgamesh and the Creation Hymn of the Rg Veda—express both the question and also disillusionment as to the hope that an answer will ever be found. We thus find at the outset one indubitable fact, confirmed by at least five thousand years of investigation during which all the resources of observation, experimentation, inspiration, and reason available to man have been brought to bear; namely, that our ultimate questions have never been answered and that we are still as far from answering them as we have ever been. 

Our quest is still for the secret of human destiny. It is a journey into the unknown; but, since every journey must have a beginning, we can take as our starting-point the recognition that our goal is indeed unknown; that we do not know where and how mankind arose, and cannot tell whither we are bound nor what we should be doing. Man has always been thus ignorant of his destiny. He is today neither more ignorant nor less ignorant than he was a thousand, or five thousand, years ago. Recognising this, we are bound to put aside any idea that there is progress in man's knowledge of the reason for his existence on the earth, and so may, perhaps, even reconcile ourselves to the prospect of living in everything, and for ever, in the domain of the relative and the uncertain. The theory of universal relativity has taught us that we must be prepared to abandon any expectation of precise and final answers. We have been forced to admit that precision and generality are to be achieved only if one is sacrificed to the other. 

The scientist and the philosopher have tried to discard from their language such words as 'rather', 'somewhat', 'perhaps', and to avoid all forms of adjectives that end with 'ish'. They may not object to saying 'this colour is greyish', but they will not tolerate such expressions as 'this proposition is true-ish' or 'rather true' or even 'somewhat true'. 

Yet such words that draw attention to the uncertainty and relativity of all our possible knowledge are indispensable if we are not to deceive ourselves and mislead others in what we say. 

Throughout the past two thousand five hundred years the spiritual history of mankind has been a quest for the Absolute. The ultimate values—truth, beauty, and the rest—have been pursued in absolute terms. Philosophy has demanded of its doctrines absolute self-consistency, completeness, and adequacy. Science has sought for final principles of explanation and for rigorous laws of nature possessing universal validity. Religious devotees could not bring themselves to believe in a God whom they could not regard as absolutely incomprehensible and yet absolutely good—absolutely powerful and yet absolutely merciful. Art looked for the ideal of an absolute beauty, and for forms that should be final and imperishable. In political and social life, men have looked for ideal forms of society in which absolute justice could be combined with perfect equality and complete freedom. Belief in the possibility of discovering absolute values has been the guiding principle not only of the Graeco-Roman civilisation and those that have descended from it, but also of the Islamic, Hindu, and Far Eastern civilisations. It has been accepted as a dogma throughout the Megalanthropic Epoch$^1$ The motive behind the unquestioning acceptance of this dogma has been the desire to sustain man's illusion that he stands at the centre of a world which he can know and master. 

In each and every domain this dogma has proved to be untenable, and within the last century has been abandoned everywhere, either tacitly or overtly. The Epoch of the Absolute has ended and that of Relativity has begun. Nevertheless, we are still very far from having grasped the implications of our new world-outlook and therefore, in nearly every field, we are in the uncomfortable position of those who try to sit between two stools—unable resolutely to abandon all our absolute expectations, nor able yet to enter fully into the ways of thinking that belong to the new epoch. We must put aside the old search for the absolute—not as a search beyond our present powers, but rather as one inherently misguided. We have not so much to make a confession of failure as to admit that what we have tried to do should never have been attempted. There is, in any case, nothing to be lost; for absolutism has been dead these hundred years, and of those who still remain loyal to absolute conceptions—whether in religion, in science, or in politics—few have either faith in their profession or hope in their practice. 

If it is impossible for us to make final or absolute judgments upon any subject whatsoever—even upon the forms of thought or logics that we shall adopt as a test of significance—then everything is to be regarded as uncertain, even uncertainty itself.$^2$ If uncertainty is adopted as a canon of thought, it again must not be taken as final. Nevertheless, we cannot hope to progress unless we make some assumptions as to that which is beyond our immediate experience of this present moment. The simplest and most plausible assumption we can make is that we men, with our equipment for apprehending the world, are a fair sample of the world we apprehend. If we discover that accident and uncertainty are never absent from our own experience, then we may reasonably suppose that they are present everywhere and in everything.$^3$

- $^1$ So called to draw attention to the exaggerated significance that has been attached everywhere to man and his powers of cognition and action. Cf. J. G. Bennett, The Crisis in Human Affairs, pp. 27 et seq.] 

- $^2$  Cf. A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, p. 4: "Philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical first principles. Weakness of insight and deficiencies of language stand in the way inexorably. Words and phrases must be stretched towards a generality foreign to their ordinary usage; and however such elements of language be stabilized as technicalities, they remain metaphors mutely appealing for an imaginative leap."]

- $^3$ Cf. Bertrand Russell, Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, p. 527: "All human knowledge is uncertain, inexact, and partial. To this doctrine we have not found any limitation whatsoever."]