It is very probable that one reason why we cannot find answers to our deepest questions is that we have not at our disposal the instruments we require. Our perceptions are limited and our capacity for thought has restrictions that no ordinary man can overcome. Our judgments are in the form of 'yes' or 'no'—more or less qualified and more or less clear. When confronted with complicated questions, we are obliged to resort to an artificial simplification that may, it is true, enable us to give definite answers; but, in the process of simplifying, we inevitably discard that which is the most important factor—namely, the concreteness of the situation itself.

In the realm of ideas, man can count up to two and sometimes, in specially favourable circumstances, as far as three. He has no notion at all of what would be required for entertaining richer combinations. This limitation applies not only to man's thought but also to his feelings and to his instinctive processes. His judgments of feeling reduce almost always to the choice between like and dislike, attraction and repulsion, interest and boredom. His instinctive reactions have the same dualism of pleasure and pain, of activity and repose, of stimulus and inhibition

Closely allied to the cult of the Absolute is the assumption that limitations—due, in fact, to the structure of our human organism and its psychic functions—are inherent in the larger world of which we men form so small a part. We commonly experience ourselves and the world as moments arising successively in time and uncritically take this temporal actualisation as the only reality. There are, however, solid grounds for inferring that the temporal sequence we perceive in the natural working of our senses and our minds is by no means unique; but that, on the contrary, there are many different lines of time, actualising in parallel. It seems, moreover, that these different lines of time must react upon one another in a way that our senses are incapable of perceiving. If this inference is correct, it follows that the greater part of the reality present at any given moment is inaccessible to human sense-observation.

We speak of the past as being dead and gone, and of the future as not yet existing. Because, with the means at our disposal, we cannot re-enter the past, we assume that no movement in that direction is possible. Because we cannot outstrip the march of time and penetrate into the future before it arrives, we assume that all existence is subject to the same limitation. Making always the same unwarranted assumption that our senses are instruments adequate for the perception of all that 'really' exists, we seek to explain to ourselves the meaning of our lives and our relationship to a Higher Power exclusively in terms of what we can see and touch. Such assumptions are very naive, and we can establish without difficulty that, so far from providing us with a complete and effectual means of perceiving reality, our senses distort in a characteristic manner all the messages that we receive from the outer world, thus presenting us with a foreshortened and incomplete picture by which we are constantly being misled.

We men exist on earth only for a very short period of time. The forty or fifty years during which we can work effectually to seek for the meaning of our existence and to fulfil our task on the earth would have to be lengthened tenfold if we were to have any real hope of achieving all that should be possible for man. To some extent the brevity of our personal lives is compensated by the collective memory of mankind stored in books, works of art, and other records. But we often forget how little, in fact, man can convey of his own experience by means of the written word. He can evoke feelings and he can transmit abstract knowledge, and to some extent he can also convey to others the manner in which these feelings and this knowledge were experienced, so that if they wish they may reproduce his own procedure. But the deeper understanding which is essential if human life is to enter a new epoch cannot be transmitted or even shared; for it issues solely from a man's own unique experience. Through not realizing how little can be transmitted through books or works of art as he knows them subjectively, man comes to place undue reliance upon the spoken or the written word, thereby depriving himself of the possibility of using wisely the short life that is given to him in which to find for himself the answers to his questions.

The experience of the average man is also narrowly restricted and localized in space. He knows little beyond that particular small portion of the earth's surface upon which he chances to live. All his experience is related to a body of a certain size, whereas there are events proceeding within and around him upon scales of magnitude millions—and even millions of millions—of times smaller or greater than his own specious 'here and now'. Although through scientific research he may have come to know of the existence of these events, he is quite unable to take them into account in assessing the significance of his own existence. That this is so can readily be verified by anyone who will take the trouble to answer the question whether he is able to conceive his actions being affected in any way by the needs or possible experiences of one single cell of his own body, or whether he can picture himself as being significant for a star.