Experience is the given totality. From it alone we can learn, and we must listen to what it has to tell us. In describing what we discover, we are accustomed to use such words as 'I', 'we', 'you', and 'the world', but we must not be misled by custom into supposing that there must be immediate data of experience to which such words correspond. They may prove on examination to be conventions to which we adhere without asking ourselves what meaning, if any, they have for us. Indeed, when we reflect seriously, we make the discovery that 'I', 'we', 'you', and 'the world' are not given directly in experience after all. The child, who does not use the words 'I' and 'you' and knows no world but his own authentic experience, is in closer touch with reality than we are.$^1$ 

The central problem of metaphysics—namely, being and the possibility of knowing it—is a real problem, but it is not so important or far-reaching as is sometimes supposed. It arises as a consequence of the distinction between the categories of wholeness and polarity.$^2$ This leads to the separation of subject and object and to the distinction we tend to make between self and not-self. These separations and distinctions are not the total experience, nor are they even primary aspects of it. By recognizing that this is so, we are freed from the necessity of examining many questions that philosophers have thought important. 

Obsession with one aspect of experience to the detriment of others is the main cause of disagreement between philosophers. By reason of polarity, there must always be an aspect of experience in which it appears as incomplete and inconsistent. Consequently no philosophical system can ever be constructed that is both adequate and free from contradictions.$^3$ The categories cannot be explained away. So-called non-metaphysical systems, which in all ages there have been philosophers to advocate, disguise the verity that experience is paradoxical. Natural science may appear to be non-metaphysical, but this is only because its methods consist in isolating groups of phenomena in such a manner as to ignore contradictions, or at any rate to minimize their effect.$^4$ There is, for example, a fundamental contradiction between physics and biology—that is, between the laws of matter and the laws of life; but this does not greatly trouble investigators in either field, since by the nature of their profession they are entitled to specialize. If, however, we aim to understand all experience, we cannot permit ourselves the same licence as do those who pursue the more limited objective of some specialized knowledge.$^5$

We can recast the ancient question: 'Of what stuff is all reality made ?' in the form: 'Of what stuff is all experience made ?' Ordinarily we tend to imagine that there must be two kinds of stuff corresponding to the distinction between subject and object. For example, if we look at a table it seems as if there are two quite different kinds of stuff present: one the 'inner' stuff of our awareness, and the other the stuff of the table itself, which is somehow 'outside'. This means that we make the Cartesian distinction of 'thinking substance' and 'extended substance'. This is rather like saying that because a stick has two ends, it must be made of two different materials, whereas the ends are only aspects of the stick and have no 'existence' apart from it. What exists is the experience itself. To affirm this is not to deny polarity, but to restore it to its right status as the binary aspect of experience. The event—looking at the table—is a whole, the togetherness of which derives from our awareness. It is also a relationship in which our interest or concern enables our organs of perception to respond to the impressions received from the table by selecting them from the totality of sense-data present at a given moment. It is therefore only under the category of polarity that the words 'I' and 'the table' have their usual meaning.

It is necessary to stress these distinctions because we have the strongly formed habit of thinking in dualistic terms; that is, of attending to the aspect of polarity to the exclusion of the other elements present in experience. On account of this habit of thought, all sorts of fictitious questions arise, and here again philosophers have wasted much time and energy by treating them as if they were real. The classical example for Western philosophy is the insistence of Descartes that his awareness of things is different from his awareness of himself.$^6$ The division between attribute and substance is another example of this error.$^7$ It is commonly assumed that we know only the attributes and not the substance, and that the attributes we find in experience are 'mere appearances'; whereas, in fact, there must be a 'real' substance to support them. Upon reflection, it is not hard to see that we have no isolated knowledge of attributes such as yellowness, roundness, heaviness, and so on. All we know is that wholes present themselves to us with certain recurrent features that enable one to be distinguished from another. Wholes given in experience are neither bare substance nor bare attribute, and thus the principle of wholeness is incompatible with any such division. This applies to another error; namely, that of objectifying the distinction of 'matter' and 'spirit'. If by 'matter' and 'spirit' we mean two mutually exclusive constituents of reality—one conscious and active and the other unconscious and passive—then wholes are neither spiritual nor material. No such divisions are reconcilable with the principle of wholeness. This is not all, however; for they are equally inconsistent with the principles of relatedness and subsistence. They are polarity run riot— dualism usurping a position to which it is not entitled. 

The objection to the various schemes—of substance and attribute—of spirit and matter—of idealism and realism—is not so much that they lead to contradictions as that they fail to lead to anything concrete. There is little evidence that anyone has lived better or worse as a result of choosing one metaphysical system rather than another.$^8$ 

We are in search of understanding, and this comes to us through the broadening and harmonizing of our experience. If we put aside the distinction between experience and non-experience, as transgressing the limits of our subject, we are led to the conclusion that there can be only one stuff of which everything is made. It does not follow, however, that all materials are the same. There is, for example, one stuff called wool, but this does not mean that all wool is the same; there is only one stuff called water, but ice, water, and steam are not the same. 

When we examine experience, we find that the differences that we observe are more striking than the samenesses. If experience is all of one single stuff, then this stuff must be very versatile; for it has to account for all the properties of matter and energy, and, hence, it must be expressible in terms of such observable and measurable quantities as, for example, the three independent physical magnitudes of mass, length, and time. The stuff of experience must also be capable of combination— for wholes are composite, and of being exchanged—for wholes are not invariant but constantly interact with one another. In the course of all these interactions and transformations, the single stuff must exhibit varying degrees of response, including those of life and conscious experience. Moreover, with all these various manifestations, it must remain throughout the stuff of experience. 

The ubiquitous character of this 'stuff' is well expressed in the saying of Anaxagoras: "There is a portion of everything in everything."$^9$ Anaximander, in his doctrine of 'the fathomless' also recognized, and grappled with, many of the problems of a single-stuff theory of relativity —and it was tentatively formulated by Plato as 'the indeterminate Dyad' upon which Aristotle later set the seal of his approval. 

Later philosophers have also adhered to this same conception of the stuff of experience. P. D. Ouspensky quotes Gurdjieff as stating that everything is material, but that "the concept of materiality is as relative as everything else"<sup>10</sup>. The definition of wholeness as omnipresent but relative provides the key to understanding this dictum. We realize, if we seek for the bond which holds our composite experience together, that togetherness itself is given in our experience. Moreover, we do not find any evidence that the stuff which presents itself as the stuff of our experience changes its nature from one moment to another. 

This discovery requires some examination, because it is often taken for granted that we do, in fact, encounter different stuffs—one of thoughts and one of things—one inside and the other outside our 'consciousness'. If we look more carefully, however, we find that all such distinctions break down. If I try to separate thoughts and things into two kinds of experience, my thoughts appear to be altogether inside myself and things altogether outside. A chair or a table is a classical example of a 'thing'. In some sense my body is also a thing, but the fact that I have used the qualifying phrase 'in some sense' shows that I do not always regard it as such: for example, when I am distinguishing between things as inanimate objects and animal bodies as animate objects. If my brain is a thing, are my thoughts things or are they 'myself ?<sup>11</sup> Moreover, I may be able to distinguish between my thoughts and my awareness of them, but I am then led on to ask whether my awareness itself is a thing or whether there is some quintessential or transcendental self—a mind— that is behind my awareness. Is there for ever behind all that is thing-like a spiritual stuff of mind that is not thinglike? The very fact that I am doubtful where the division is to be made—or even whether the division is anything but a matter of convenience—is sufficient to destroy any belief that the distinction is self-evident.

<sup>12</sup> It might seem that there is something artificial and unfair about beginning any discussion of such a nature with such things as tables and chairs. Some philosophers will argue that tables and chairs are mental constructs, and that therefore we must start the argument with our thoughts and go from them to the world that is their object. The dualism of subject and object then seems quite clear and straightforward—'I' am one member of a dyad opposed to a 'chair' as the other member; 'I' am not like the 'chair' and the 'chair' is not like me. It is therefore assumed that there are two kinds of stuff. But what are we to say of our subconscious reflexes? Are they subject or object? I find it impossible to assert that my sensations are a different kind of stuff from my thoughts; but a study of physiology convinces me that there is a continuous transition from the sensations of which I am aware to the physiological processes of which I am never conscious. As a result of the researches of biochemists, we are assured that there is no decisive step from physiological processes to chemical, electrical, and physical changes. Sights, sounds, and smells all lead out into the physical world, and once again we cannot tell where we are to halt, and affirm that we have reached the point where spiritual stuff ends and beyond which is mere senseless matter.

Any thorough examination of experience must thus convince us that there is only one stuff of which it is all made. We may adopt Aristotles use of the term hyle to denote what Gurdjieff calls the 'prime-source-cosmic-substance'. Hyle is not the formless ground - UNKNOWN GREEK WORD - of the early philosophers, but substance capable of recieving form and character.<sup>13</sup>  This stuff is neither spirit nor matter, and it is not even crrect to describe it as 'spirit-matter' that is as the twofold context of experience; for to do so over-emphasises the aspect of polarity, a tendency against which we must alays be on our guard. According to our coception of the homogeneity of all possible experience, hyle is that which is actually percieved and, therefore, itself phenomenal. Hence not the same as Aristotle's XXX or XXX which is the presumed reality that underlies phenomena. We know hyle through its manifestations, and these in their totality are all that is possible for us to know.<sup>14</sup> 

---

$^1$ The reader is asked to tolerate a continuing vagueness in the use of the word 'reality'. Experience is the given, and we have not yet any means of deciding the question whether or not there may be something beyond the given. By 'reality', therefore, we may mean no more than authentic, as opposed to fictitious, experience, or we may mean very much more. For the present we must leave it there. 

$^2$ It is necessary at this point to draw attention to a simple trap in which we are liable to be caught. Being is a real problem and knowledge is a real problem, but the two are not the same, for, as we can learn from experience, being cannot be known.

$^3$ The demand for consistency and freedom from contradiction has been the bane of Western philosophy. It has affected even philosophers who, like A. N. Whitehead, in their attitude towards the central problems of life have been touched by the spirit of the new epoch. Cf. A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, p. 3: "Thus the philosophical scheme should be coherent, logical and, in respect to its interpretation, applicable and adequate." Whitehead, himself, shows that this demand can never be met. 

$^4$ Cf. H. Levy, A Philosophy for a Modern Man, Chap. 2, 'How a Quality is Modified'. 

$^5$ Cf. Husserl, Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft: "Thus true science, in so far as it has become definable doctrine, knows no profundity. Every science, or part of a science, which has attained finality, is a coherent system of reasoning operations, each of which is immediately intelligible, thus not profound at all. Profundity is the concern of wisdom; that of methodical theory is conceptual clarity and distinctness. To reshape and transform the dark groping of profundity into unequivocal rational propositions; that is the essential act in methodically constituting a new science." See also Philosophical and Phenomenological Research, Vol. X, p. 197, for Ludwig's discussion of Husserl's metaphysics, which helps to bring out the limitations of an attempted phenomenology that ignores the categories.]

$^6$ Cf. Rene" Descartes, Discours de la Methode, edn. Cousin I, p. 158: "The more I doubt, the more I think, and the more I am certain of my own existence. But it must never be forgotten that I am only certain of my existence as a thinking being, not of my bodily existence. I am conscious of myself as one whose whole existence consists solely in thinking." It seems incomprehensible today that Descartes should not have seen that the certainty refers, not to his own existence but to the givenness of experience.

$^7$ Descartes defines a substance as that which can exist and be conceived without the help of anything else. Cf. Reports. quartae, p. 122. Although in practice Descartes was a dualist, dividing reality into thinking substance and extended substance, he recognized that, in the long run, this is not a workable scheme. Indeed, he acknowledged, "There is in the strict sense only one substance; that is, God" (Principia Philosophica (1644), I, p. 51).

$^8$ This refers only to strictly metaphysical systems; that is, those concerned with the question of what being is and how we can know it. Where philosophers have, either intentionally or accidentally, touched the principles of relatedness and structure, their influence upon life has been considerable. Hegel has influenced history, not because of his ontological speculations but because—in his Progress of the Notion—he introduces an unbalanced version of the triad. Descartes and Leibnitz did much to destroy religious beliefs not by faulty metaphysics but by deflecting attention from the relativity of wholeness that earlier thinkers, such as Thomas Aquinas, had succeeded in grasping. 

$^9$ Cf. C. Bailey, The Greek Atomists and Epicurus. Oxford, 1928, p. 36.

<sup>10</sup> Cf. P. D. Ouspensky, In Search of the Miraculous, p. 86. 

<sup>11</sup>Descartes reasoned thus far, but in assuming that he had now reached a new kind of reality, he overlooked the psychological fact that thought and the awareness of it can be separated in our experience. 

<sup>12</sup> Cf. J. Dunne, The Serial Universe (London, 1928). Dunne suggested that an infinite regress of levels of awareness is of the very nature of reality, and he concluded that spirit and matter are only relative terms. He thus made the very important discovery that our experience shows us the relativity of wholeness, but his theory leads to apparent contradictions which can only be resolved when the principles of relatedness and structure are also taken into account.

<sup>13</sup>  Cf. Aristotle, by whom XXX is defined as XXXX and also XXXXX, (meta 6.7.2.)

 <sup>14</sup> Single-stuff theories usually take the form either of pan-psychism—the assertion that everything is consciousness, or pan-hylism—that is, universal materiality. W. K. Clifford made the suggestion that there is a single mind-stuff, the combinations of which give rise to non-living, living, and conscious forms of existence. Cf. Lectures and Essays (1879); also Wm. James's criticism in Principles of Psychology, Chap. 5.

