The homogeneity of experience has been stressed in order to combat the view that there are different substances; that is, different kinds of reality. The assertion that experience is made of one single stuff does not, however, entail the absence of distinctions or localizations. The distinctions, or secondary aspects of the triad, may be suggested by the following episode: 

It is summer, and I am walking in the country. My attention is occupied with planning a lecture that I am to give tomorrow, when I hear a distant church bell. At that moment I look over the fields and notice some cows being driven in for milking and, by association, Gray's 'Elegy' comes into my mind. Immediately, and again by association, I contrast it with J. F. Millet's picture 'L'Angelus'. I am annoyed by these trivialities, and feel that my instinctive satisfaction with the peace of the countryside has been disturbed. All this has occupied at most a few seconds, and the event can be localized rather closely in space and time. It has been happening to me on this June evening, here and now. The constituents of the event—the countryside, the church bell, the poem, and the painting—are common property, and even my thoughts, occupied with planning some future action, suggest a very characteristic and well-known human situation. 

(a) The Three Aspects of Function 

A functional account of this event can be given in three different ways. The first way is to treat it as a fragment of the total process that is the existence of the universe. The event proceeded just so and not otherwise, and thereby added its quota to the self-actualization of the Whole. There took place, through me, a transformation of energy. Sense-impressions and memories, together with the momentum of my inner functions—thoughts, feelings, and the like—came together to produce a new combination, part of which had been fixed in the past and part transmitted to the future as a set of possibilities. When the word is used in such a context, we are referring to function in its cosmic aspect. 

The second way of describing the event is to refer it exclusively to my own experience. I can trace back the preceding events that brought me to this spot on this particular afternoon and also those that fixed in my memory the 'Elegy' and 'L'Angelus', and made possible the associations that they evoked. The whole description hinges upon me— my history and the mechanics of my own bodily and psychical functions. I am such, and the events occurred in such a way. Wholeness, relatedness, and structure all enter into it, but the characteristic feature is that it is my own act of cognition. In order to express this particular character, we may say that knowledge is the subjective aspect of function. This definition of knowledge must be taken in a wide sense, as including not only intellectual cognition, but also emotional and instinctive attitudes, bodily habits, and so on—all of which prove on examination to be homogeneous with intellectual knowledge. We can go further and say that since function is universal, knowledge must be universal also. On this subject, Gurdjieff quotes the aphorism, 'To know means to know all'. The third method of description could be called that of an impartial observer. He sees a man of such and such appearance, walking over the brow of the hill, evidently occupied with his thoughts. The man appears to hear the sound of the church bell, for he raises his head and looks across the fields. His gaze rests upon a herd of cows for a few seconds. Then he turns his eyes away from them to the corn-field. There is a slight contraction of his face muscles that suggests an irritating thought. The observer goes to speak to him and is told of his experience. This account verifies and amplifies the conclusions drawn from observing the man's external behaviour. This third method of description shows the objective aspect of the event, and leads to the definition of behaviour as the objective aspect of function. It is possible to give three descriptions because there are different perspectives, not because there are three different events. Moreover, all three descriptions refer to function only. They can be made to correspond with any degree of accuracy and detail, but only so long as we confine ourselves to the perceived process, interpreted in terms of the categories. 

(b) The Three Aspects of Being 

If we now try to make a corresponding analysis of the same kind in terms of being, we find that we lack the appropriate language. We have at present no measure of being that is independent of subjective experience. The event described has some force of inner-togetherness— certainly less than that of a more vivid experience, certainly more than that of a state of half-conscious day-dreaming. But even from the subjective aspect we cannot yet assess the quality of consciousness present. For the external observer there is nothing but a very uncertain inference to be drawn from the degree of coherence and consistency apparent in the outward behaviour. 

These disappointing results should not lead us to the conclusion that being is of necessity inarticulate. By definition, being can be experienced but not known. If we experience it only vaguely, it is because we have not trained ourselves to find discriminations of the sort that we have learnt to make in our observations of function. A power of self-observation, usually attainable only by special training, is required to recognize the fluctuations of togetherness that occur constantly in the sleeping and waking states of man—loosely termed unconsciousness and consciousness—and to assign them to the appropriate gradations of being. Nevertheless, even without such power the connection between the different states of consciousness and the degree of togetherness of our inner world must be evident to anyone who examines his experience from time to time during his waking hours. It is this that is referred to in the analogy by representing being as the intensity of illumination in the room. Thus we reach the conclusion that consciousness is the subjective aspect of being, and so is correlative to knowledge, which is the subjective aspect of function. 

If we now ask ourselves whether there is anything in being that corresponds to behaviour, we make a most interesting discovery. Being has indeed an external aspect, and this is discoverable in the state of aggregation of the hyle. The relativity of matter gives us the observable measure of being. The denser or more opaque the aggregation of the hyle, the lower the level of being. The finer or more translucent the state of the hyle, the higher the level of being. Moreover, the words 'higher' and 'lower' correspond here to the intensity of inner-togetherness of a given whole. For example, the observable aspect of water-being is the degree of aggregation of its molecules by which we distinguish ice from water and water from steam. Wherever there is such a means of discerning the degree of aggregation of the stuff of experience, we have a means of making an objective assessment of being. Obviously the example of water is only an analogy, for what we observe here are functional changes, and, as always, we are confronted with the difficulty that being cannot be 'known'. Therefore the objective assessment of being must usually be made in terms of the visible changes of function that accompany the invisible transformations of being.

It is, however, a matter of direct experience for most of us that we encounter in other people a greater or less translucency. This is often quite independent of functional manifestations, and may be found in its greatest intensity where functional activity is least. Function is univalent, whereas being is multivalent. 

We can now apply to the elucidation of the nature of being some of the conclusions previously reached; that is, firstly the relativity of wholeness; secondly, the definition of being as the intensity of inner-togetherness of any given whole; and thirdly, the conclusion that there can be only one stuff of experience—that is, hyle—whose differentiations must consist in various states and degrees of aggregation and combinations of the aggregates. The state of aggregation of the hyle—or the primordial stuff of experience—present in a given whole can be called its 'materiality'. The higher the level of being the less is it materialized, and the lower the level of being the more is it materialized. Moreover, this degree of materialization is the only aspect of being that presents itself externally. Hence we come to the definition of materiality as the objective aspect of being. Being is, and must always remain, inaccessible to knowledge. Nevertheless, by learning to become sensitive to the degree of materiality present in a given whole, we may find a clue to the appreciation of being.<sup>1</sup> 

Here it is necessary to interpose some considerations upon the universality of consciousness. We commonly use the word 'consciousness' to mean 'a form of awareness identical with, or analogous to, that present in man'. It is only by convention that we restrict the meaning of words to an anthropomorphic context. The word 'consciousness' can mean 'the form of awareness associated with the state of inner-togetherness of any whole, irrespective of its nature, constitution, scale, or duration'. With such an expansion of meaning the word gains universal significance, and we do not have to extricate ourselves from the difficulty of defining consciousness by reference to function. Being can then be defined as the cosmic aspect of itself. 

The argument from human consciousness to universal consciousness does not lead to pan-psychism, provided that we take into account the relativity of being. This thesis is ancient and was familiar to Plato and Aristotle. In a pithy formulation, Cicero argues: "From sentience and vitality in the individual to an a priori sentience in the universe." The priority of universal sentience over individual sentience was axiomatic for the Neo-Platonists, such as Plotinus and Proclus. 

(c) The Three Aspects of the Will 

There remains for consideration the third component of the fundamental triad; that is, will. Will in its cosmic aspect is universal. We cannot conceive a multiplicity of motive forces, each completely independent of every other. This would indeed be an irredeemable chaos, for there would be no overriding authority whereby the independent wills could ever be harmonized. The very fact that we discover coherence in our own experience must convince us that there cannot be an ultimate conflict of entirely separate wills; yet experience teaches us also that will is subject to limitation, for contingence and uncertainty are no less given in our experience than are regularity and order. We find a pattern incompletely realized—something predictable, something unpredictable.<sup>2</sup>  Nevertheless, some intuition of universal order gives us the assurance that in our survey of the universe we are not witnessing a meaningless play of unconnected wills—equivalent to blind chance driving where it listeth. Here we meet the overwhelming contradiction of all contradictions—that of unity and multiplicity. The sharpness of the contradiction is such that it is impossible for us to rest at either extreme. In the domain of will, unity and multiplicity are both unacceptable terms. The inadequacy of ordinary language compels us to modes of expression that must lead to contradiction. If we use the term 'The Will', the form of language is that of the singular number; but we must contrive to invest it with a deeper significance from which any distinctions of one and many are banished. The property whereby one single unlimited will manifests itself as manifold and limited is authoriz-mos, or the acceptance of self-imposed restrictions. From this property will acquires the objective character of law. Law is the form of all process and, since all experience is of process, law is universal. When applied to a single whole, law is the form of all its possible manifestations. So, every whole, on every scale, has its own law. Furthermore, since wholeness is relative, law must also be relative. 

We require a word to express the meaning of will in its subjective aspect. This latter must be distinguished from the other two modes of apprehension; namely, the knowledge of function and the consciousness of being. Will neither is anything nor does anything, and we can therefore neither be conscious of it nor know it. Nevertheless, it has its own discriminations, but these concern form rather than function and the manner rather than the content of events. We apprehend form through participation, and the quality or degree of this participation is our understanding. Understanding is that inner condition by which we become aware of the operation of will. Every situation confronts us with its own characteristic 'why', 'thus', and 'how', and our ability to apprehend this intrinsic character of the situation derives solely from understanding which is the subjective aspect of will. 

The affirmative character of will justifies its description as 'that which uses the functions under the conditions created by consciousness'. This must not, however, lead us into the error of supposing that the will 'does' anything. It is the affirmation of a form or pattern to which events must conform. Hence we find the objective aspect of will to be law. There are no laws of function, but rather regularities of behaviour. There are no true laws of being, for being has no differentiations. Therefore, law, in the objective sense of the term, must derive solely from the omnipresence of will. Will is that which is everywhere the same and yet everywhere unique, and the role of the understanding is to achieve cognosis of this omnipresent active element of all experience, and to make apparent what is required in order to conform to its demand.

<sup>1</sup>  Cf. Chhandogya Upanishad, VI, 1.2.

<sup>2</sup>  Cf. Whitehead, Modes of Thought, Lecture V, pp. 117-42: "There is a large element of accident in a single sentence of a lecture. . . . Special forms of order exhibit no final necessity whatever. There is no sharp division. There are always forms of order partially dominant and partially frustrated. Order is never complete; frustration is never complete. . . . The universe is not a museum with its specimens in glass cases. Nor is the universe a perfectly drilled regiment with ranks in step, marching forward with undisturbed poise. Such notions belong to the fable of modern science. . . .The universe is more than a process."