'How?' and 'Why?' are questions that can be answered only in terms of the will. All other questions can be prefaced by 'What ?' We must be careful to notice that the word 'what ?' is ambiguous, since to ask 'What is this ?' is entirely different from asking 'What is this doing?' Correctly, we should use different words for asking questions about being and about function, but it is convenient here to put into one class all questions of 'What ?' in order to specify the remainder that cannot be asked in this form. 

Wittgenstein says "not how the world is, is the mystical, but that it is" and he adds that the "contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its contemplation as a limited whole".<sup>1</sup> He recognizes that being-questions cannot be answered in functional language, but he does not distinguish the two ways in which any functional account is incomplete. He recognizes that laws do not describe function, but he sets down conditions under which propositions about function may or may not be true. From this it should follow that it is laws alone that answer the question 'How?'; whereas all functional statements tell us only what is going on. 

At the other extreme, Wittgenstein says, "of the will as subject of the ethical we cannot speak".<sup>2</sup> Here, again, we have to distinguish between the differences of being upon which ethical—and indeed all other— values depend, and the possibility or impossibility of a given relationship between different levels. In other words, we must distinguish between levels of being and laws of being, just as we must distinguish between what is going on and the laws which prescribe what can go on. In each case the laws are manifestations of will. We have further to consider the meaning of the question 'Why?' This question can be put in the form, 'Upon what ultimate law do all proximate laws depend ?' The answer to the question 'Why?' presupposes a level of being at which it is possible to rest, and to remain satisfied with the answer that it requires no answer.<sup>4</sup>There will, however, still remain the need to show how this level can be related to other levels, and here we again encounter the problem of will. 

It will now be apparent that the questions 'Why?' and 'How ?' differ only in that the former is ultimate and the latter is proximate. If we could know enough about 'how' we should then see 'why'. The power to see 'why' and 'how' as a single question is that which we call understanding. This power is never fully attained, but each time we come to grips with our experience and persist in our questioning, we can hope to come one step nearer to understanding. Understanding is the will to live fully within the limits of our authentic experience. 

It now becomes clear why Gurdjieff refers to will as the 'omnipresent active element' that in any given situation breaks down into three components. In its universal aspect, will remains isolated from the particular events that we need to explain. The incomprehensible character of will as the urge inherent in everything towards its self-realization has to be admitted in every philosophy. It is common ground to realism and idealism, to spiritualism and materialism. The world goes round, and there must be something to make it revolve. To pretend that we know what makes the world go round is nonsense, for we can never stand aside from the process. 

It is a quite different matter when we ask the question, 'How does this particular piece of world go round ?'; for then we can answer in terms of laws. The omnipresent active element then shows itself under its three aspects of the laws of function, the laws of being, and the laws of will. Seen from one view-point, the laws appear as a restraint placed upon an arbitrariness of function; seen from the opposite, however, they indicate that every small 'how' can be merged into a larger 'how'. Therefore we find that the laws are not passive or negative, but are active and affirmative.

A man is what he is and does what he does. That this is so would seem to make of him an individual until we reflect that the same is true of anything else that exists—even totally degraded energy in the form of heat. The all-important question about man is whether it is possible for him to be an individual; that is, can he become an independent source of initiative ? By definition, such a question belongs to the will, for the answer prescribes the possibility or impossibility of a given situation—that is, the laws by which it is governed—and also how it came about and, ultimately, why it is thus. Will, therefore, is seen to be not only the universal active element but also the particular active element in every recognizable whole. 

Neither being nor function is unique, but will is always unique. It is the affirmation, I AM. This must, however, be understood as meaning no more than 'it is possible for me to be thus and impossible for me to be otherwise'. The significant character of will is that it has its own laws and, therefore, is not the blind urge that Schopenhauer and his followers supposed it to be. Through ignoring its laws, we lose sight of the cosmic significance of will and the impossibility of accounting for anything whatsoever without reference to it.

<sup>1</sup> Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-philosophicus, 6.44 and 6.45. 
<sup>2</sup> Tractatus, 6.423. 
<sup>3</sup> Tractatus, 6.521 and 6.522.