We have now made a preliminary survey that enables us to give a provisional definition of framework: 

**Framework is the totality of universal conditions that, applied to any and every situation, determines whether it is possible or impossible.** 

The word 'possible' in this definition is used in the sense already discussed of 'not against the rules', and the word 'impossible' as being contrary to rule. For example, in Euclidean space it is impossible to construct a triangle the sum of whose angles is less than two right angles, for much the same reason that it is impossible to start a game of chess by moving the queen. If, however, we choose to vary the rules and say that we have Riemannian instead of Euclidean space—or fairy chess instead of orthodox chess—the situations that are impossible are no longer the same. 

If framework determining-conditions are a set of universal laws, according to which the phenomenal world lives, moves, and has its being, then the question naturally arises as to who lays down these laws. Is there a Legislator who imposes them, or are they inherent in the nature of reality ? If we consider attentively the steps by which we establish the notion of framework, we see that it is neither the one nor the other. **The laws are the limitations placed upon the arbitrariness of phenomena by the form of our own human consciousness**. We are not, however, entitled to conclude from this assertion that time, space, logic, probability, and the rest, are merely subjective forms of will. 

Ultimately, all forms must be manifestations of one and the same will and, hence, **framework is no more than a consequence of the self-limitation of that will upon a given level of being**. Even for a consciousness liberated from the restrictions of our everyday experience there still must be a distinction of possible, and impossible situations, and therefore laws of framework. 
For lower levels of being, the balance between possibility and impossibility will be shifted in the direction of even greater restrictions than those that apply in our human experience. Thus all possible situations—non-human, human, and superhuman— must take their place in the Great Whole and there must always be a meaning to the question: 'Is this situation possible or not?' In both directions the relativity of being holds sway far beyond the limits of our human experience. We must not forget that this is so, even when, for a given purpose, we confine our inquiry within these limits. As applied to phenomena, the framework determining-conditions are fairly definite, but because of the relativity of being their incidence must vary: what is true on one level may not be true on another and vice versa.