According to the principle of structure, a single pattern underlies all the diversity of phenomena. We cannot understand this principle nor fully grasp its meaning. Relying upon the method of progressive approximation, however, we can permit ourselves to be bold enough to formulate a postulate based on this conception even before we can understand or apply it, because we have an intuition of its truth that is deeper than the contradictions of our more superficial experience of phenomena. This we may call the postulate of universal similarity. As a practical measure, we can employ the postulate, a rule to be applied in the reduction of phenomena to facts. It is according to this postulate that we make the assumption that the correspondences we recognize are all partial manifestations of one universal pattern. We must seek, therefore, to penetrate more deeply than is required for the discovery and clarification of universals. We soon find that undiscriminating knowledge, as expressed in the common forms of language, always implies, though usually without recognizing that it does so, a universal similarity. 

Natural science has to make basic, that is, metaphysical, assumptions as to its subject-matter, but seeks to justify these assumptions by appeal to experience. It remains true, however, that it is not sense-experience alone that assures us of the uniformity and continuity of phenomena. On the contrary, we find a heterogeneous and discontinuous stream of impressions. Similarly, in our inner world we discover an equally heterogeneous, and not less discontinuous, stream of automatic associations. 

We are accustomed by long habit to interpret our sense-impressions as material objects and their behaviour, and our associations as thoughts and thinking. But behind these interpretations lies an assumption as to the structure of both the one and the other that requires an act of faith. We believe that nature does not play tricks upon us, and also that our automatic associations are mostly related to our sense-impressions. We also are forced to make the assumption that memory is more or less reliable. Through making these assumptions uncritically, we tend to overlook the disorder and complexity of our immediate experience.<sup>1</sup>

Nevertheless, natural scientists in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were not wholly at fault in the procedures they followed. Their error consisted in a mistaken belief in the adequacy of their methods and the finality of their judgments. The search for universal laws was made on the assumption that these would prove to be simple and expressible in terms of human knowledge. Newton's laws of motion were regarded as a foretaste of laws even simpler and even wider in their scope. There was in these centuries a strange disregard of the phenomenon of contingency and a consequent refusal to accept uncertainty as an element of fact. That science made great progress notwithstanding this refusal is due to an unconscious reliance upon the rule of universal similarity. The doctrine of Lord Kelvin that measurement is the sole source of reliable knowledge cannot be accepted without criticism, but it has, nevertheless, a solid foundation in the principle of universal similarity. When we make the assumption that a foot-rule remains the same whether we apply it to measuring either a wall or a length of cloth, we are invoking this principle. Scientific induction has, indeed, no justification beyond the delivery of our experience that similar situations do recur. These examples are sufficient to show how widely the characteristic of universal similarity casts its net, and how it can serve to knit together many of the assumptions without which natural science could not work. When applied with due care—that is, having regard to what we find in our experience—the postulate of the homogeneity of fact and the rule of universal similarity can provide a solid basis for the unification of the sciences. 

**It has become increasingly clear that observation cannot be divorced from the observer. This realization has resulted in a return to phenomenalism as opposed to objectivism in science**. But the real significance of the change in attitude has not yet been generally grasped. We revert to phenomenalism because we find that we are unable to disregard the elements of being and will that are present in every moment of experience, and that this discovery points to the direction in which the unification of the sciences is to be sought. **It is obvious that, so far as attentive observation is concerned, we have to take into account the role of consciousness in perception.** The difference between one scientist and another lies largely in the ability to 'see' the phenomena they observe. Phenomena are not historical; they are, and have always been, there for experience. Fact is historical; it is the accumulated result of man's reduction of phenomena to the status of knowledge. Each significant step in the history of fact is made by recognizing a contradiction. **The mediocre scientist sees only the same facts, for he is adapted to this limitation by his knowledge of what the experiment he is making should yield and this blinds him to that which is actually present. The scientist of genius sees that which contradicts the present fact; that is, the phenomena itself.** 

This is not all, however, that is involved in the direct perception of phenomena; the form of will present in the observer must also be taken into account. Experience teaches us that not only may two scientists see different and apparently contradictory factors in the same situation, but they may also perform different experiments, based on these opposing views, in order to unmask the phenomenon. **The great scientist is not the one who knows the fact but the one who has the will to change it.** This is true experimentation, and it is very rarely attained. Even the scientist of genius, however, selects his experiment 'as he must'; that is, according to the form of will that is present in him and that he himself is unable to change. He is always guided consciously or unconsciously by his feeling for universal similarity.

<sup>1</sup> Cf. H. H. Price, the symposium of the Aristotelian Society on the Causal Argument for Physical Objects (1945), p. 92. Price criticizes the appeal to direct experience, which he calls 'sensibilism', saying, "I think he (Dr. Ewing) underrates the complexity and the untidiness of the sensibilistic worlds"; and adds, "The more complex nature is, the better I like it."