Knowledge of fact is the first aim of the natural philosopher, but his ultimate goal must be the understanding of meanings. **In order to perceive and to communicate meanings, it is necessary to generalize in a manner that is uncalled for in the ascertainment of facts.** 

**In order to generalize, we require to adopt various rules for passing from the known to the unknown.** If such rules are to be effectual, they must have universal significance. All such rules can collectively be described as the laws of framework, and, since they serve for the ascertainment and communication of meanings, they must be connected primarily with the will. 

Although will cannot be known, it enters every phenomenon as the laws that determine its possible and impossible actualizations. Phenomena correspond to those levels of being where there is little independence of the environment. **Consequently, the laws by which they are governed are, for the most part, not concerned with individual behaviour but with the regularities observed in large numbers or in cyclic situations, which together constitute the laws of nature.** Just as function is most easily studied by eliminating as far as possible distinctions of being, so with will we can best discover regularities by starting from the lowest level of being where the inner-togetherness of wholes plays little or no part. In this way, laws are discovered which are independent of the gradation of wholeness and must therefore be applicable throughout the domain of fact. These laws differ from scientific generalizations by reason of their pervasive character, which can be expressed as the postulate of the universal validity of framework laws. **Framework is the form in which we experience phenomena.** **Phenomena have spatial arrangement and they succeed each other in time.** Space and time are framework properties; they are neither behaviour nor existence. There are, however, universal regularities that are not bare configuration and successiveness. Time itself is also conservative and irreversible. Space has determinations of size and direction. These are not the only kinds of universal determinations to which all phenomena are subject. Nevertheless, whatever the restrictions may be, they can all be grouped in classes according to their properties; but when they are so grouped, we find that certain rules must be observed if we are to make statements that correspond to experience. These are the rules of logic, which remain valid irrespective of the kinds of wholes to which they are applied. Finally, there are regularities connected with the co-existence of potentialities; for example, the rule that the higher potentiality implies the lower, but not vice versa<sup>1</sup> **All the regularities of an universal character that do not depend upon any given gradation of wholeness can be called 'framework determining-conditions'.** The chief characteristic of these conditions is that experience never fails to conform to them—at any rate, upon the level of phenomena accessible to our ordinary states of consciousness. Framework determining-conditions are, therefore, unlike scientific generalizations—which have only limited validity within a given stratum of existence; nor do they correspond to the regularities of existence—which are neither more nor less than the grouping of wholes according to the intensity of their inner-togetherness. 

**The four determining-conditions, with their chief phenomenal characteristics, are shown in the following table:**

| Determining-condition | Phenomenal Characteristic           |     |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------- | --- |
| Eternity              | Potentiality and intensity of being |     |
| Time                  | Actualization and irreversibility   |     |
| Hyparxis              | Ableness-to-be and cyclicity        |     |
| Space                 | Presence and co-existence           |     |

In the course of thousands of years, mankind has reached a general attitude towards phenomena in which the distinctions of behaviour, existence, and framework are implicitly adopted, although not explicitly recognized. Scientific inquiry and philosophical criticism do no more than give a certain precision to the common-sense interpretation of experience, and sometimes this precision is achieved at the expense of applicability. We are so accustomed to the common-sense view of the world that we cannot readily recognize the steps by which it has been reached. It might help us, therefore, if we were to follow through the stages by which an intelligent observer might come to understand the game of chess, without any prior knowledge of the game, by the study of phenomenal regularities alone. 

Let us suppose that a very intelligent being, knowing nothing about human life, notices that it often happens that two human beings take a chequered board with thirty-two black and thirty-two white squares, and a box containing thirty-two pieces of wood half of which are coloured black and the other half white. After placing the pieces upon the board in a certain manner, the human beings move them at irregular intervals from one square to another. When an observer has watched a sufficiently large number of games, he may reach certain conclusions as to the significance of what is going on. He finds certain regularities. The first he noted almost from the start; that is, that the phenomena are associated with a board of sixty-four squares and pieces of wood which, though differing in shape, colour, and size, fall into six distinct classes, recognizable by similarities of shape and also of the manner in which they are placed and moved upon the board. The observer is aware of the fundamental characteristics of all experience—namely, wholeness, relatedness, structure, and so on. For this reason, his study of the phenomena will enable him to distinguish between further kinds of regularity—those to be observed in the behaviour of the chessplayers. One of these is the sequence of events; the players sit down, arrange the pieces on the board, decide upon the choice of colour, make their opening moves, pass into the middle game and reach an end-point, when one player is mated or lowers his king. It is a complete process, in which the principle of structure can be discerned. Even though often the cycle is not completed because the game is drawn or stale-mated, yet the underlying pattern can always be recognized. This is the visible aspect of the process that can be known and interpreted in terms of functional regularities. 

The other kind of regularity is not visible as a process. **It is discerned by the observation of a very large number of games. The laws of chess discovered in this way can be completely established, but the observer—who has no means of communication with the players—can never tell whether he has established the totality of all laws. For example, he may watch thousands of games without meeting a certain situation to which a special rule applies.** Nevertheless, if he has once grasped the nature of a game played according to rules, he will understand that they are the framework within which every game must be played or else forfeit the right to be a game of chess. **There is thus an almost infinite variety of possible situations, but there is one unvarying factor in all of them; that is, the rules of the game**. 

When the observer has in this way discovered the laws of chess, he may begin to notice that the games may be classified in terms of a factor that has nothing to do with the sequence of events nor with the rules of the game. This will lead him to discover yet other regularities of a quite new kind; namely, those that derive from the skill and concentration of the players. In order to interpret these new regularities rightly, he would need to understand the properties of attention, memory, and combinative skill that do not show themselves in the outward behaviour of the players. He would, however, establish that the gradations of playing strength form a single ordered series—from tyro to world champion—such that a player belonging to one class would be likely to defeat players in the lower and lose to those in the higher classes. The study of the game of chess would thus have led the very intelligent observer to recognize **regularities of three kinds: the first, corresponding to behaviour, is the general pattern of activity of those interested in chess; the second, corresponding to framework, is the laws of chess to which every game must conform; and the third, corresponding to the stratification of existence, is the grouping of players in classes according to their playing strength.** 

The analogy is imperfect, but it serves to show how phenomena transcend the distinctions of subject-object. The laws of framework cut across such divisions, but they are only fully exemplified at the lowest level of being, where differentiations of consciousness have little significance in laying the foundations of natural science. We can examine separately the regularities of mechanism, of existence, and of framework; but when we come to apply the results to phenomena—that is, to actual experience—we must restore the perspective under the penalty of distorting the picture.

* Cf. MacTaggart's 'A-B-C-D Series' elaborated in The Nature of Existence.