We shall use the word 'fact' to denote the content of knowledge both actual and potential. Fact for us is, therefore, all that we know and all that we could know. By making use of the connection that we have found between knowledge and function, the definition can be made independent of our private experience. **If knowledge is the ordering of function and fact is the content of knowledge, then we can say that fact is the experience of functional order.**  

Fact is in two respects poorer in content than experience. The content of consciousness and understanding is not fact, and even our experience of function is only fact in so far as it is reduced to order and becomes knowledge. Nevertheless, the content of all knowledge is the world of fact, and what is not fact cannot be known.<sup>1</sup> Experience teaches us that we never know a simple fact. The nature of function is such that it is complex and composite. Fact is composed of facts, and each experience of order on any scale is an atomic fact. 

Let us take an example of an event in which a man draws two balls at random from a bag containing fifty, each labelled and numbered. This event comprises three moments and its actual and potential content can be represented by the following diagram: 

| ?? XX ??  |               |               |                     |              |
| --------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------------- | ------------ |
|           | Moment 1      | Moment 2      | Moment 3            |              |
| Potential | Any one of 50 | Any one of 49 | Any one of 48       |              |
|           | may be drawn  | may be drawn  | may be drawn        |              |
| Actual    | Bag with 50   | One ball      | Ball numbered balls |              |
|           | numbered 46   | 17 drawn out. | Drawn out.          |              |
|           | Past          | Present       | Future              | **?? XX ??** |

We can suppose that our inquiry is taking place at moment 2, when the first ball is being drawn. Moment 1 is now past and moment 3 is future. The event as a whole can be known as a single fact, but it can also be known in terms of six different facts—three actual and three potential. From the standpoint of fact as we have defined it, all six have exactly the same status, although they have quite different status in terms of the sense-experience of the man who is drawing the balls. For example—assuming him not to be clairvoyant—the potentialities of all three moments are unperceived, and he is aware only of what he sees and touches. This does not mean, however, that he knows what he sees, nor does it mean that he does not know what he does not see. In either case, knowledge is not direct and immediate, but indirect and mediated by his functions. Facts are never given directly in sense-experience, for they arise only after an ordering process has been accomplished. 

 Moreover, we can know not only the present facts, but past and future facts; we can know potential facts as well as those that are actual. 
 
 The instruments whereby we attain knowledge of fact are various. They include sense-experience, introspection, memory, reflection, inference, imagination, hallucination, and dreaming. But all facts, however they may be known, are always of the same kind. An event of yesterday is a fact in so far as we infer from memory that it occurred; our recollection of the event is another fact because we could isolate it from the first. At any given moment there are facts already completely actualized from the past, facts in the course of actualization, and there are facts with the potentiality of actualization in the future. Tomorrow's sunrise is a fact, although it has not yet been actualized, and may even not be actualized if in the meantime the earth should happen to be destroyed. Mirages in the desert are facts and so are the castles in Spain of our fantasy. Even the wildest ravings of delirium are facts, for they can be known. Again, twice two is four are a fact, even though there may be no particular event, potential or actual, to which the statement refers. In the domain of fact there is a twofold multiplicity. 
 
 There are many knowers of fact and there are many facts known. No one knower knows all facts; of this we can be certain. It is also probable, but not certain, that no one fact is known to all knowers. Moreover, what is a fact for one knower may either be a different fact for another or even can be no fact at all. Hence, with fact there arises always the problem of communication. 
 
 Three conditions must be fulfilled in order that an item of experience should qualify for designation as fact: 
 (a) It must be experienced, 
 (b) It must be functional in character 
 (c) It must be known. 
 
 The last requirement distinguishes fact from function in general and makes fact relative to a particular experience. It is not legitimate to say 'so and so may be function, but it is not function for me'; but it is quite legitimate to say 'so and so may be a fact, but it is not a fact for me; for it has not entered my experience and I do not know it'. 
 
 If, however, I say 'so and so is a fact but it is not important', I am making an assertion that is more than factual—I am giving expression to a judgment of value. 'Important' is a value word and its meaning is relative to a state of consciousness. We can easily verify that our judgments of the importance or unimportance of any element of experience varies according to our state of consciousness. It has very little to do with the functional content of the experience itself. There is hardly any functional manifestation that at one moment may not seem important and at another unimportant. We must therefore conclude that values cannot be known. This agrees with their ascription to the element of consciousness in our experience.<sup>2</sup> 
 
 The study of values must be divided into two distinct domains. In one we seek an answer to the question 'What are values?' and in the other we seek to answer the question 'What does the word ought mean?' This corresponds roughly to the subject-matter in Kant's two Critiques of Judgment and of Practical Reason respectively. The former question must be answered in terms of being and consciousness, and the latter in terms of understanding and will. The first may be called aesthetic and the second ethical. To deny that there can be either aesthetic or ethical knowledge does not put an end to the search for values, nor does it deprive practical life of its meaning. So long as our attention is directed only towards the functions, we cannot expect to discover anything beyond the facts. But, in spite of ourselves, we continue to make judgments of value and to feel ourselves subject to an ethical demand. 
 
 The standpoint of logical positivism is justified in so far as it asserts that we can never know either what is valuable or what we ought to do.<sup>3</sup> We can be conscious, however, of what is valuable and we can understand what to do. We can never make a sharp, unambiguous distinction between fact and value, because neither pure fact nor pure value can be experienced separately. Hence, philosophic discussion about the relations between the two has almost invariably an artificial and unsatisfying flavour. It is very convenient to be able to study being without reference to functional activity, but we must not be led into the error of supposing that function and being can subsist one without the other. When we meet with problems of value, we cannot do without knowledge; but to resolve them we are compelled to go beyond knowledge. If all our experience could be described in functional terms— and therefore known—the advance of knowledge might ultimately provide us automatically with the means of answering any and every question. It is just because the questions that touch us most deeply cannot be answered in terms of knowledge alone that we are compelled to add a new dimension to our inquiry. In order to find this, we must return to experience. 
 
 The 'important' is that which we cannot know because it is by its very nature unknowable—it is value and not fact that really matters. Saurat, indeed, adopts the extreme position that to know anything deprives it of value, and that faith in God is only significant because we are incapable of 'knowing' that He exists.<sup>4</sup> 
 
 Values are associated with interest, and interest depends upon potentiality and the ability to adjust the actual and the potential to one another. When an event is a 'foregone conclusion', it ceases to be interesting. A situation in which there were only one potentiality would be devoid of values. Conversely, we can say that the greater the wealth of potentialities inherent in any element of experience, the more do we feel that it demands of us a judgment of value. To a first approximation, we can say that when experience is regarded from the standpoint of its actual content, we discover facts, and when it is regarded from that of its potential content, we discover values. 
 
 Facts make no demands upon us and values make a demand that we are powerless to satisfy; for the character of values is such that the realization of one must involve the sacrifice of another. Values and facts can be regarded as the affirming and denying elements that, unless reconciled, produce only the polar force of frustration and dissatisfaction. We may use the word meaning to designate that which reconciles fact and value, provided that we remember that this use requires that meanings should be associated rather with will than with consciousness or function. We must recognize also that this interpretation of the word 'meaning' implies that values in the absence of fact mean nothing. A world of pure value must collapse into a dream of unfulfilled potentialities, just as a world of unrelated fact could only be a dead world. Always and in everything there is a need to reconcile not only fact and value but one level of values with another. In the domain of fact there is incoherence; in that of values there is a conflict of loyalties. The discovery of meanings on each scale and every level is the task of the understanding. The present use of the word 'meaning' is consistent with that adopted in Section 2.4.2. where it was defined as the recognition of a recurrent element in experience; for, as we shall see later, recurrence is characteristic of the reconciling element and recognition depends upon the combined action of value and fact. 
 
 A meaning is something different in nature from either a fact or a value. We do not know meanings, and we cannot experience them consciously. This is why, as we have seen in the study of language, the communication of meanings is itself a triad in which the sign, the symbol, or the gesture serves to transmit the act of will. In the evolution of language, the starting-point is the communication of knowledge; but the aim of language is to achieve a transmission of meanings. In the inner experience of an individual there is a similar transformation, that begins with the mutual liberation of consciousness and function but leads towards understanding of what the experience means. We use such terms as 'natural', 'authentic', and even 'real' to indicate that we recognize a meaning in a given experience, and such words as 'spurious' and 'illusory' to indicate that a given expression does not mean what it purports to mean. We also use words such as 'true', 'false', 'beautiful', and 'ugly' in an attempt to convey meanings. Reflection will show us, however, that the meaning of anything is to be what it is. The more a given entity is able to be itself, the more meaning does it acquire. 'Ugly', 'beautiful', 'true', 'false' are terms that convey meanings only when they are set in a stable context of recognized facts. Nevertheless, they are value words and therefore relative to being. Truth is significant not as a criterion of knowledge nor as a quality of experience, but as something that reconciles the two. Beauty may be a 'pure' value—this we shall examine later—but the meaning of the word cannot be found except in a context of fact.



<sup>1</sup> Cf. Wittgenstein, Tractatus, Section 1.

 <sup>2</sup> Philosophers find it hard to decide whether value-words are concerned with knowledge or with emotive or conative states. Those who reject the view that we can know what is important usually believe that the foundation of moral philosophy or ethical theory is destroyed by such rejection. There are several errors in such an opinion. One error is to regard cognition and emotion as antithetical. Thought and feeling both belong to function and are forms of knowledge, even though feelings cannot be fully expressed as propositions. Cf. 'Moral Theory, Ethical Judgment and Empiricism', contributed by S. Cavell and A. Sesonske to Mind (1952), Vol. LXI, p. 543. The dispute between cognitive and non-cognitive theories as to the character of value-judgments demonstrates that we are not dealing either with pure experience or with pure knowledge, but with the undefined territory that lies between experience and fact. 
 
<sup>3</sup> Cf. H. Reichenbach, The Rise of Scientific Philosophy, p. 277.

<sup>4</sup> Cf. D. Saurat, Death and the Dreamer and The Three Conventions (New York, 1926).