Pattern suggests the maker of patterns. Our contemplation of experience cannot rest upon the recognition that there is a source of order, since order is not ultimate. That which can separate order from disorder is the power to create patterns. We cannot be directly aware of this power except in our own consciousness; but we can infer its presence from our observation of the world-order. Creativity, as Berdyaev has rightly taught, cannot be the ultimate category. "Only the recognition of created being permits an original creative act in being, an act which produces something new and unprecedented. If everything in being was not created, but had always existed, the very idea of creativity could not have been born in the world." "In every creative act, there is absolute gain, something added."$^1$ The word 'absolute' here falsifies the picture, nevertheless we must understand that in creativity there is an authentic addition to the sum total of experience; but this must remain subject to the condition of its being a possible addition. This condition is guaranteed by the category of pattern that stands towards creativity as potentiality stands towards repetition. We shall therefore take as our tenth category of experience the element of creativity which lies behind all patterns. 

The principle of creativity reads: In all experience there is evidence of a creative activity that is not only the source of order but also the vehicle of disorder. The polar character of creativity calls for a system of not less than ten terms for its manifestation.$^2$

$^1$ N. Berdyaev, The Meaning of the Creative Act, London, 1955, pp. 128-9. 
$^2$ E.g. the eightfold individuality together with the polar force of order-disorder that is the source of pattern. We shall see later that creativity cannot be the source of a new Reality.