The defect of spurious language that consists in disregarding the differences of being and function is remedied in ordinary discourse by modulating spoken words and sentences with the aid of tonal inflections, rhythms and cadence, gestures and postures. All these means for amplifying verbal communication can be classified as personal and subjective in so far as they fail in the absence of a personal relationship. We feel the need thus to supplement the deficiencies of the bare sign, but the result is to produce not an authentic language but, rather, a mixed form that can be effectual only against the background of a stable context. The gesture and tone of voice that for a Chinese or a Tibetan will indicate a recurrent significance and hence a distinction of meaning might have for a Frenchman or a German an entirely different significance. Even between two people speaking the same language and referring to the same subject, some degree of common understanding of abstract questions can arise only after frequently repeated attempts have established a common context.

It should be noted here that authentic language does not depend upon the importance of its subject-matter. Authentic objective language begins when due attention is paid to meanings. Such language cannot dispense with the discipline through which a common stable context is established, but in this case the discipline is intentional and its purpose is more or less understood by the participants.$^1$ 

Thus the first requirement for any authentic language is that those who are to use it must share in its creation; that is, in the establishment of a common stable context. Moreover, the process cannot be exclusively performed through signs, because the signs themselves will require verification, and it is necessary to take into account emotional, instinctive, and other factors that influence the attention of those concerned. Let us suppose, for example, that a group of people wish to establish a common authentic language for describing elements in a sunset. They may for this purpose meet together to watch the sun setting under many different conditions in order to recognize the recurrent elements by which the meaning of the experience can be interpreted. If, however, the persons concerned differ in their capacity for emotional and instinctive response, and also in the extent to which their perceptions have been trained, the meanings that they will see will be different and the signs adopted will fail to establish an authentic communication. In general the establishment of a stable context can be achieved in one of two ways, the first of which can be called the method of technical reference, and the second that of logical abstraction. Technical reference is the situation that arises when a functional activity, shared by the participants of discourse, provides the common stable context. The words and sentences then used acquire meaning from previous recognition of the recurrent features in the situation. Technical reference is, however, effective only where functional activity of a mechanical kind is concerned; otherwise it may be found that even such a technical discussion as 'What has gone wrong with the engine of the car ?' or 'Why was the souffle spoilt ?' can break down through the disappearance of a common context in which the disputants can share. 

Language made effectual by technical reference has been responsible for the greater part of human co-operation in the functional activities of life. Nevertheless, we find that even the simple and obvious method of deriving the meaning of signs from the recognition of common recurrent experience is ignored in most conversations. A particular defect prevalent in technical language is to ignore the relativity of wholeness and treat all entities as if they had the same existential status. In situations that are technical or scientific in the commonly accepted sense, some care is taken to select signs and symbols that refer to the subject-matter of communication. In general language, however, the words used have a long history during which they have been applied to situations that have undergone change or even ceased to exist. The result of this is that such meaning as words may convey lags behind the transformation of the entities to which they refer. 

The method of logical abstraction proceeds by assigning conventional meanings and considering the construction of sentences by which relationships of meaning can be expressed and communicated. By this procedure the difficulty of finding a stable context is reduced and historical fluctuations of meaning minimized in their effect. The construction of abstract languages is, however, an almost wholly negative procedure, for when carried to the limit it becomes merely the communication of conventional meanings divorced from experience. If, on the other hand, language is reconstructed to give signs that refer only to material objects and the behaviour pattern of living beings—including men and women—then we obtain one of those systems—of which semiotics is an example— from which not only are distinctions of being and will excluded, but even those elements of function that belong to the emotional, instinctive, and other non-intellectual elements of functional experience. In order to discover common meanings, there is needed a process of communication and joint verification, and it is thus that the transition from mixed language to the authentic language of philosophical signs is made possible.

$^1$ Cf. Gurwitsch, Philosophical and Phenomenological Research (1947), p. 653.