From our study of the categories we can see that the relativity of wholeness introduces a dimension which no system of signs can adequately represent. The very word 'whole' when used as a sign cannot carry all the meanings of wholeness that we encounter in our experience. This can readily be seen if we examine such a sentence as 'a man is a whole'. Such a sentence evidently has different meanings according to whether we regard man from the physiological, the psychological, the social, the philosophical, the historical, the religious, or various other possible perspectives. The sentence has, moreover, meanings different not merely in content but in their very nature, according to whether we interpret the word 'man' as applying to function, being, or will. 

The transition from the language of function to the language of being is made when signs are replaced by symbols. The difference lies in the way in which experience is apprehended. The construction of a sign is performed according to the interpretation of experience; that is, by clarifying and delimiting the meaning recognized in a recurrent situation. The sign lifts the meaning out of its context and gives it a status of its own. In this process the integrity of the experience is sacrificed: as, for example, when we create the signs 'brain' and 'mind' to clarify the meaning that we find in the physiological and the psychological approaches to the act of thought. We may use the term intuition to designate the process of recognizing meanings without interpretation; that is, without extracting them from the context of experience. Intuitions can never adequately be expressed or conveyed by means of signs, because they recognize the meaning of the context as well as the meaning of the element symbolized. If, for example, we use the word 'thought' as a symbol, we must be prepared to forgo clarity and definition and to accept it as referring to the relationship of a finite centre of consciousness towards the stream of awareness present in that centre. Although it is possible thus to indicate in words the place of the symbol 'thought' in the context of experience, there is neither clarification nor delimitation that entitles the word 'thought' to rank as a sign. On the other hand, it is also more than a sign because it takes in all the meanings that we associate with such words as 'perception', 'recognition', 'association', 'awareness', and also 'mind' and 'brain'. 

Intuitions are the raw material of being-language as sense-impressions are the raw material of function-language. Every word relating to being must have a flexibility of meaning that takes account of the fact that every whole is relative and every context unlimited. In order to create a language of being, we need to have a set of symbols each standing for a group of related intuitions. 

The language of being must have one more dimension than the language of function, and hence where signs may be single-valued, symbols need to be multi-valued. The power of a symbol consists in connecting different gradations of wholeness. Signs cannot be used to express both the content of different levels and also the relationship between the levels. For example, only confusion can arise if the word 'surface' is used as if it had the same meaning when applied to an atom as to a table. The word 'surface' should therefore properly be used as the symbol of our intuition of the property of wholeness whereby every whole A divides existence into a part that is A and a part that is not A. The intuition has no fixed meaning that can be designated by a sign. 

If there were not different levels of being, a sign-language could be created that would be adequate for designating all possible meanings. Because there are different levels, a given situation can have more than one meaning, and these meanings require to be distinguished. For this, symbolism is necessary. It is not, however, the perception of different levels that is symbolical any more than the recognition of meanings is itself a sign. In a very broad sense we can define all awareness of the simultaneous presence of different levels as 'mystical experience'. Mystical experience can either be left as intuition or interpreted to give a theology. In the second case, the mystic makes use of signs and treats his experience as if an unambiguous meaning had been discovered and was being expressed. Alternatively, he may endeavour to preserve the multivalence of the experience and if so his utterances are symbolical. In most mystical utterances, signs and symbols are confused and communication is ineffectual.$^1$  

The confusion is greatest when the mystic uses ordinary words with a meaning that for him has the force of a symbol but is taken by the reader as no more than a sign. If the reader wishes to discover the intended meaning of what is written, he must constantly remember that words taken as signs lack the dimension of consciousness, which for the mystic is the most significant element of his experience. 

The meaning of a symbol can never be fully known. Always there is in it that which transcends function and points obscurely to the consciousness of being. Therefore, when we are confronted with a symbol, we must look into our own experience in order to discover what is reflected there. We find that we ourselves are present in the symbol and the symbol in us, for it is not an abstract sign that can exist apart from living experience.$^2$  In function-language signs can be tied down to external meanings, but in being-language symbols thrust us back towards experience and so can serve to link one experience with another. The sign is an instrument of knowledge, whereas the symbol evokes a state of consciousness. 

It may help to clarify the distinction between the first three forms of language if we again take as an example the use of the word 'man'. In the mixed language the word 'man' is used without reference to any stable context. In a single conversation the word may be used with different meanings, and more often than not the meaning that is valid upon one level of experience is applied to the interpretation of a level upon which the word should be used as a sign for a machine or at best an animal. In the language of function, the word 'man' can be defined by reference to the categories. In this way an unambiguous set of sign-words can be delimited, each of which refers to an authentic recognizable recurrent element in human experience. All that can be known about man can be expressed and communicated, providing the participants in discourse have discovered in their own experience the meanings to which the signs refer. Having passed through the discipline of self-observation and mutual interrogation, the members of a philosophical school interested in the study of man can communicate without fear of deception or confusion. Notwithstanding the adequacy of the communication, it is nevertheless incomplete. What it is to be a man cannot be conveyed by signs. In order to express man-being, we must enter into all the experience of humanity and participate in the different levels of experience and gradations of being of which mankind is constituted. There is no longer one stable context, but a hierarchy of contexts so different that the meaning found at one level may contradict the meaning found at another. The context of discourse on one level cannot be merged with the context of another. Mankind is a sevenfold structure, and each of the seven qualities or gradations constitutes an independent context of meanings. Although the distinction of levels cannot be made the object of conceptual signs, an intuition of their relationship is nevertheless attainable. The word 'man' then becomes in the true sense a symbol when it is used to express the whole range of meanings to be found in human experience. 

The power of symbolism cannot be grasped in functional terms. Symbols must be invested with the intuitions of being before they can serve as instruments for the second or theoretical language.

In the mixed language of ordinary speech words are used indiscriminately as both signs and symbols. When this is done, the result is a spurious significance, a deceptive meaning that has lost touch with experience. It would be generally agreed that a symbol has no content save the experience for which it stands, and that, hence, the use of symbols for communication requires a special discipline that is very different in character from that which is needed for the philosophical language of signs. The context of sign-meanings is functional but that of symbol-meanings is conscious. It has been emphasized repeatedly that states of consciousness can neither be known nor communicated, and therefore symbolism in the sense just formulated would seem to be impossible. Nevertheless, an authentic language of symbols can be created by a group of people undertaking any common endeavours in the field of consciousness. The creation of theoretical being-language is also the work of schools, but of a different order and subject to different discipline and demands from those required from schools upon the level of abstract philosophical language. The language of being is an instrument in which meanings are not discovered by interpretation but created by effort. Those who attain to the use of symbol-language have themselves passed through the inner transformation that liberates consciousness from function. In such people different levels of being are consciously discriminated; therefore different, and even contradictory, meanings can be experienced in a single intuition. Only people so transformed are capable of participating in being-discourse. 

Symbolism rests upon the categories of experience, but moulds them into a richer unity. Symbolism is not analytic but synthetic. The problem of communication meets here with an obstacle that does not exist in the functional language where a single stable context can be discovered and shared. The meaning of symbols is not found but created; communication depends upon mutual recognition of the steps by which the meaning of a symbol has been reached. Not everyone who wishes can arrive at the possession of symbolical language. One may know what needs to be done but one may not have the force to do it.

$^1$ Cf. N. Berdyaev, Spirit and Reality, p. 146: "From the manner in which many mystics describe their experiences, they might appear to be the exponents of monism, pantheism, anti-personalism, anti-humanism, or of an attitude denying human freedom and love. But, as we have already observed, the idiom of mysticism is untranslatable into theological and metaphysical terms. But the problem posed by the mystics still remains unsolved and disturbing." 

 $^2$ Cf. L. A. Reid, Aesthetic Meaning, Proc. Arist. Soc, 1955, Vol. LV, p. 227. "Symbol and meaning in aesthetic experience are constantly shifting, what was meaning becoming symbol for further meaning."